# Heterozygosity

### Overview
This pipeline describes how to estimate heterozygosity of each sample across the genome. This could give insights into the levels of sequence diversity within each population, identify inbred individuals, and identify the genetic sex of each sample based on heterozygosity of the Z chromosome. We can also identify the region around the pseudoautosomal region of chrZ, which shows elevated heterozygosity in females.  

### Required Input
This step requires the mapped sequencing data (`.bam` files), which was generated in step `1.3`.   

### Output
The output is an estimate of heterozygosity for each sample, and genome scans of heterozygosity across the genome for each sample. Plots of this dataset are generated in the `1.7c_heterozgosity.Rmd` file, and saved in the file `1.7c_heterozgosity.html`   

# Rohan

[ROHan](http://grenaud.github.io/ROHan/) is a program to measure heterozygosity and to detect runs of homozygosity: regions of the genome that lack heterozygosity, that may be caused by recent inbreeding in the sample's history (ie, the sample's parents shared recent ancestors). The depth of coverage should be above 4-5X. There are also special settings to use for ancient samples. It will give you three things:  
1) A global estimate of heterozygosity for the sample (outside runs of homozygosity)  
2) Estimates of heterozygosity in windows of the genome  
3) Locations of any runs of homozygosity that are detected  

As input, it takes an **unfiltered** bam file aligned to a reference genome (duplicates can be removed, but don't filter for mapping quality, it is used to inform the model!).   

I am running through the samples in parallel.  

First, I set up my working directory with a text file that lists all the sample names that I will loop through.  
```bash
mkdir -p /home/0_GENOMES1/0_RESEQUENCING_PROJECTS/2_PROJECTS/Stercorarius/1_Data/1.7_heterozygosity
cd /home/0_GENOMES1/0_RESEQUENCING_PROJECTS/2_PROJECTS/Stercorarius/1_Data/1.7_heterozygosity
cat > samples.txt #copy-paste the text below, press enter, and press ctrl-d to exit. Whatever you copy-pasted will be written to the file.
```
```
LTJA_MKP990
PAJA_B20730
PAJA_USNM606730
POJA_MKP1559
POJA_4
POJA_IB2659
GRSK_MKP1592
GRSK_MKP1593
CISK2
CISK55
CISK3
CHSK_MKP2451
ANSK7
ANSK01
ANSK8
Alca_torda
Fratercula_arctica
Uria_lomvia
```
Now I can run Rohan: I just need to provide it with the path to my bam file, and the reference genome.  

```bash
#Run rohan with the data mapped to Stercorarius parasiticus
cat samples.txt | parallel --jobs 4 time /home/0_PROGRAMS/rohan/src/rohan --rohmu 2e-5 -t 8 -o {1}.c.rohan ../../0_Reference_genome/0_reference/Stercorarius_parasiticus.ref.fa ../1.3c_mapping/merged/{1}.PAJAbowtie.marked.bam

#Make an output file to look at:
cat samples.txt | while read sample ; do echo -n "$sample" " " >> heterozygosities.c.rohan ; grep "Genome-wide theta outside" "$sample".c.rohan.summary.txt >> heterozygosities.c.rohan ; done

```
* `rohmu`: the rate of heterozygosity that you would tolerate to consider something a "run of homozygosity". I found that for 2e-5, it did not detect any runs of homozygosity, even on female Z chromosomes, so this result is likely not meaningful.  

## Outputs:  
* the `*.hEst.gz` file contains heterozygosity estimates for each (1 Mb) window of the genome  
* the `*.summary.txt` file contains the estimate of global heterozygosity  

Note: these are not the values that I will report. I will recalculate them in R, removing chrZ.  
```
LTJA_MKP990  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00429648	0.00421617	0.00454009
PAJA_B20730  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00243563	0.00226749	0.00276367
PAJA_USNM606730  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00190788	0.00182616	0.00217721
POJA_MKP1559  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00388986	0.00367161	0.00423959
POJA_4  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00286239	0.00267046	0.00316546
POJA_IB2659  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00289609	0.00271276	0.00323272
GRSK_MKP1592  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00124243	0.00114828	0.00147083
GRSK_MKP1593  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00112642	0.000990666	0.00138514
CISK2  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.0009825	0.000910619	0.00121862
CISK55  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00106415	0.00096961	0.00125013
CISK3  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.0010083	0.000896861	0.00120963
CHSK_MKP2451  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00138055	0.0012261	0.00162127
ANSK7  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00114985	0.00105652	0.00131914
ANSK01  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00124042	0.00113777	0.00144499
ANSK8  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00123787	0.00112475	0.00145703
Alca_torda  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00337227	0.00322875	0.00364468
Fratercula_arctica  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00220342	0.00198797	0.00252024
Uria_lomvia  Genome-wide theta outside ROH:	0.00459805	0.00452413	0.0047745
```
Notes:  
* In past analyses, my estimate for global heterozygosity was higher for the bwa mapping than it was for bowtie2 vvsensitive. This I expected since bwa had lower mapping stringency with the settings I used - I noticed that female heterozygosity on the Z chromosome was higher, which indicates perhaps some mismapping, or tolerance for mapping diverged W sequence to the Z.  
* the average global heterozygosity values include the Z chromsome, which is NOT a good idea - I will recalculate them with the Z removed. I have mostly ZW females so heterozygosity of the Z is not valid.  
* you might expect that females would have essentially no heterozygosity on the Z. Beware though, that regions of the W chromosome can share enough homology with the Z to map to the Z (for example, regions that are in or used to be in the pseudoautosomal region.) Some of these regions can be quite diverged between Z and W, leading to very high heterozygosity in these regions, and so summarizing the Z chromosome will average between these regions of (somewhat false) high heterozygosity and nearly-zero heterozygosity could give a rather useless estimate - it is better to plot heterozygosity across the chromosome (as is done below) to really understand what is going on in your data.  

**Timing**: took 1072m58 (28517m user time) for running on the 7 samples mapped to Stepar. Running 4 at a time on the main server (8 threads each), took 540m36.989s (3632m15.352s) for the last one.  

Next, to visualize the heterozygosity and calculate mean heterozygosity of the autosomes, I moved the `.rohan.hEst` files to my computer to analyze in R. These analyses are in the markdown file `1.7_heterozygosity.Rmd`, which is knitted into the file `1.7_heterozygosity.html`.  
